Web exports guide (#15)
godot-rust/gdext-book: src/toolchain/web-guide.md

<!--
  ~ This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla Public
  ~ License, v. 2.0. If a copy of the MPL was not distributed with this
  ~ file, You can obtain one at https://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.
-->

# Intro to Web Builds

> Web builds are a fair bit more to get started with compared to native builds.

Reviewer: I think this might sound a bit more natural:

```suggestion
Web builds are a fair bit more difficult to get started with compared to native builds.
```

> This will be a complete guide on how to get things compiled.

Reviewer: Just to be a bit more descriptive:

```suggestion
This will be a complete guide on how to properly compile your game using `gdext` to WebAssembly, which will allow you to use `gdext` in the web.
```

Reviewer 2: I agree with the extension, but I think "properly" is not needed 😉

Reviewer: I agree! Feel free to remove "properly"

> Setting up a web server is out-of-scope for this guide, and best found elsewhere.

Reviewer: Being a bit more precise (also I think no hyphens are needed here):

```suggestion
Setting up a web server to host your game in is out of scope for this guide, and is best explained elsewhere.
```

> - Web support with `gdext` is experimental and should be understood as such before proceeding.

Reviewer: Do the gdext docs have support for warning boxes? I believe that'd be ideal here. Otherwise, we could add something in bold like **WARNING:**.

Also, I think it may be interesting to point out explicitly here that it "may have bugs we aren't aware of".

Author: I believe you'll get a compile error if you don't enable the `experimental-wasm` feature flag.  Beyond that I'm not sure.

Reviewer 2: We do have warning boxes, see ` ```admonish ` tags elsewhere.

But only the 2nd bullet point is a warning. The first can also be moved up to the "This will be a complete guide..." section.

---

## Installing Pre-Requisites

- Install a nightly build of `rustc`, the `wasm32-unknown-emscripten` target for `rustc`, and `rust-src`.

> Assuming that Rust was installed with rustup, this is quite simple.

Reviewer: For consistency:

```suggestion
Assuming that Rust was installed with `rustup`, this is quite simple.
```

  ```sh
  rustup toolchain install nightly
  rustup component add rust-src --toolchain nightly
  rustup target add wasm32-unknown-emscripten --toolchain nightly
  ```

- Install Emscripten
  - The simplest way to achieve this is to install `emsdk` from the git repo. Recommended to use version 3.1.39 for now[^1]

  ```sh
  git clone https://github.com/emscripten-core/emsdk.git
  cd emsdk
  ./emsdk install 3.1.39
  ./emsdk activate 3.1.39
  source ./emsdk.sh     (or ./emsdk.bat on windows)
  ```

  - It would also be HIGHLY recommended to follow the instructions in the terminal to add `emcc`[^2] to your `PATH`.
    If not, it is necessary to manually `source` the `emsdk.sh` file in every new terminal prior to compilation.
    This is platform-specific.

> [^1]: Note: Due to a bug with `emscripten`, the maximum version of `emcc`[^2] that can one compile `Godot` with is `3.1.39`.  `gdext` itself should be able to support the latest version of `emcc`, however, it may be a safer bet to stick to version `3.1.39`.

Reviewer: The comma before `however` confused me a bit at first :p (two possible fixes) (also included some minor stuff)

```suggestion
[^1]: Note: Due to a bug with Emscripten, the maximum version of `emcc`[^2] that one can compile Godot with is `3.1.39`.  `gdext` itself should be able to support the latest version of `emcc`; however, it may be a safer bet to stick to version `3.1.39`.
```

```suggestion
[^1]: Note: Due to a bug with Emscripten, the maximum version of `emcc`[^2] that one can compile Godot with is `3.1.39`.  `gdext` itself should be able to support the latest version of `emcc`, but it may be a safer bet to stick to version `3.1.39`.
```

[^2]: `emcc` is the name of Emscripten's compiler

---

## Project Configuration

> - Enable the `experimental-wasm` feature on `gdext` in the `Cargo.toml` file.
>   It is also strongly recommended to enable the `lazy-function-tables` feature to avoid an extremely long compile time with release builds.
>   It is likely to due a bug, but is still being investigated.  Edit the line to something like the following:

Reviewer: Maybe a bit better (`gdext` appears as `godot` so that first line might be confusing in principle)

```suggestion
- Enable the `experimental-wasm` feature on `gdext` in the `Cargo.toml` file.
  It is also strongly recommended to enable the `lazy-function-tables` feature to avoid an extremely long compile time with release builds, which is still being investigated (likely the result of a bug).
  Edit the `godot` dependency line in that file to something like the following:
```

  ```toml
  godot = { git = "https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext", branch = "master", features = ["experimental-wasm", "lazy-function-tables"] }
  ```

> - At the same level as your `Cargo.toml`, create a `.config` directory and inside of that,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- At the same level as your `Cargo.toml`, create a `.cargo` directory and, inside of that,
```

  create a `config.toml` file (if one doesn't already exist). The contents of this file should be as follows

  ```toml
  [target.wasm32-unknown-emscripten]
  rustflags = [
      "-C", "link-args=-sSIDE_MODULE=2",

>       "-C", "link-args=-sUSE_PTHREADS=1",

Reviewer: Quick remark: it seems that Emscripten, since version 3.1.34, recommends the usage of `-pthread` instead of `-sUSE_PTHREADS=1` (the latter being deprecated <a href="#footnote-1">[1]</a> <a href="#footnote-2">[2]</a>), so we should probably recommend that from the start. @zecozephyr can you confirm everything still works fine with the `-pthread` flag (the two should be equivalent)?

<p id="footnote-1">

[1] See my comment here: https://github.com/godotengine/godot-cpp/pull/1247#issuecomment-1742448769

</p>
<p id="footnote-2">

[2] See the PR to emscripten which made this change: https://github.com/emscripten-core/emscripten/pull/18923

</p>

Reviewer 3: Considering Godot 4.1.3 is still based on emscripten 3.1.18, and there was some recommendation somewhere of matching the emscripten version of the engine (iirc), is there any rush to use the new flag? I would say the docs can be updated when the current stable version of godot uses a version of emscripten that deprecates its usage. (although to be fair I'm not sure anyone has tested whether any of the wasm stuff works using the 3.1.18 toolchain)

Reviewer: I don't believe there is a rush, but I guess it's better if we adopt the new "good practice" ASAP 🙂

Regarding Godot 4.1.3 being built with Emscripten 3.1.18, you make a good point (even though 4.2 is gonna be stable soon); however, I think the usage of -pthread should only depend on your local Emscripten install (so, the one you use to build), not Godot's, so, in theory, it _should_ be fine anyway as we recommend using emsdk 3.1.39 for 4.1.3+ already (so it would be consistent)

Might be worth testing first either way!

Reviewer 2: Is the new flag already supported on our suggested minimum version?

* If yes, I don't see any reason to keep the deprecated one around.
* If no, we should use the deprecated one with a comment, that in newer Emscripten versions, a different flag is used.

Reviewer: > Is the new flag already supported on our suggested minimum version?

From the text, the suggested emsdk version seems to be 3.1.39, so yeah (the flag was added in 3.1.34, as per the second reference in my initial message in this thread).

      "-C", "target-feature=+atomics,+bulk-memory,+mutable-globals",
      "-Zlink-native-libraries=no"
  ]
  ```

- Edit the project's `.gdextension` to include the web path.
  This is probably at `godot/EXTENSIONNAME.gdextension`.

>   The format will be similar to the following

Reviewer: Clearer (what is the "web path"?)

```suggestion
- Edit the project's `.gdextension` file to include the path to the compiled WASM binary.
  The file to edit will probably be at `godot/EXTENSIONNAME.gdextension`.
  The format will be similar to the following
```

  ```gdextension
  web.debug.wasm32 = "res://../rust/target/wasm32-unknown-emscripten/debug/EXTENSIONNAME.wasm"
  web.release.wasm32 = "res://../rust/target/wasm32-unknown-emscripten/release/EXTENSIONNAME.wasm"
  ```

---

## Compile the Project

- Verify `emcc` is in the `PATH`. This can be as simple as doing the following:

  ```sh
  emcc --version
  ```

> - Compile the code.

Reviewer: Being specific just because it is also particularly useful to compile to your own target as well, so you can use the editor! (Maybe this can be mentioned somewhere? As a note like "If you `cargo clean`, don't forget to compile to your own target first (`cargo build`) so you can still use the editor" or something similar)

```suggestion
- Compile the code to WebAssembly (Emscripten).
```

>   It is necessary to both use the nightly compiler and specify to build std[^3], along with specifying the emscripten target.

Reviewer: Gotta check if the monospace doesn't break the footnote, but I believe it shouldn't

```suggestion
  It is necessary to both use the nightly compiler and specify to build `std`[^3], along with specifying the Emscripten target.
```

  ```sh
  cargo +nightly build -Zbuild-std --target wasm32-unknown-emscripten
  ```

> [^3]: The primary reason for this is it's necessary to compile with `-sSHARED_MEMORY` enabled, but the shipped `std` is not, so building std is a requirement. Related info on about wasm support can be found [here](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/77839).

Reviewer: Consistency and other things

```suggestion
[^3]: The primary reason for this is it's necessary to compile with `-sSHARED_MEMORY` enabled, which the shipped `std` doesn't, so building `std` is a requirement. Related info on WASM support can be found [here](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/77839).
```

---

## Set up and Test in the Godot Editor

- Add a web export in the Godot Editor. In the top menu bar, go to `Project > Export...` and configure it there.
- Make sure to turn on the `Extensions Support` checkbox.
  ![Example of export screen](images/web-export.png)
- Back from the main editor screen, there's an option to run the web debug build without needing to do an export or set up a web server.
  At the top-right, choose `Remote Debug > Run in Browser` and it will automatically open up a web browser.
  If your default browser is not Chrome or Edge, you'll need to copy the URL and paste it into one.[^4]

>   ![Location of built-in web server](images/web-browser_run.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Back to the main editor screen, there's an option to run the web debug build (_not_ release) locally without needing to fully export the game or set up a web server.
  At the top right, choose `Remote Debug > Run in Browser` and it will automatically open up a web browser.
  If your default browser is not Chromium-based (e.g. if you use Firefox or Safari, currently unsupported), you'll need to copy the URL (which is usually at `localhost:8060`) and open it in a supported browser, such as Chrome or Edge.[^4]
  ![Location of built-in web server](images/web-browser_run.png)
```

[^4]: Some info about browser support can be found in [this PR](https://github.com/godotengine/godot-cpp/pull/1247#issuecomment-1742367779).

---

## Debugging

- Currently the only option for wasm debugging is
  [This extension](https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/cc++-devtools-support-dwa/pdcpmagijalfljmkmjngeonclgbbannb?pli=1)

>   for Chrome. It adds support for breakpoints and a memory viewer into the F12 menu.

Reviewer: Consistency etc.

```suggestion
- Currently the only option for WASM debugging is
  [this extension](https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/cc++-devtools-support-dwa/pdcpmagijalfljmkmjngeonclgbbannb?pli=1)
  for Chrome. It adds support for breakpoints and a memory viewer into the F12 menu.
```

---

> ## **KNOWN CAVEATS**

Reviewer: This seemingly doesn't have an effect

```suggestion
## KNOWN CAVEATS
```

Reviewer 2: I would not use SCREAMING CASE here.
```suggestion
## Known caveats
```

Or alternatively, an ` ```admonish warning title="Known caveats" ` box.

- Godot 4.1.3+ or 4.2-dev is necessary.

> - The only browser supported appears to be Chrome or Edge, Firefox and Safari don't work with GDExtension yet.

Reviewer: maybe clearer (as e.g. Brave or Opera might also support it)

```suggestion
- The only browsers supported appear to be Chromium-based (Chrome or Edge, for example), as Firefox and Safari don't work with GDExtension yet.
```

<!--
  ~ This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla Public
  ~ License, v. 2.0. If a copy of the MPL was not distributed with this
  ~ file, You can obtain one at https://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.
-->

# Intro to Web Builds

Web builds are a fair bit more difficult to get started with compared to native builds.
This will be a complete guide on how to get things compiled.

Information to consider before starting:

- Setting up a web server to host and share your game is considered out of scope of this guide, and is best explained elsewhere.
- Web support with `gdext` is experimental and should be understood as such before proceeding.

> ---

Reviewer 2: This should not be needed before h2 titles (also below).

## Installing Pre-Requisites

- Install a nightly build of `rustc`, the `wasm32-unknown-emscripten` target for `rustc`, and `rust-src`.

> Assuming that Rust was installed with `rustup`, this is quite simple.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add that nightly is needed for the build flag `-Zbuild-std`.

  ```sh
  rustup toolchain install nightly

>   rustup component add rust-src --toolchain nightly

Reviewer 2: Is this 2nd step really needed? AFAIR I never did this.

Reviewer: See here: https://discord.com/channels/723850269347283004/1134478713002655876/1176743545768521738

Author: It wasn't necessary for me, but someone in the discord somehow didn't have rust-src.  So, I think best to leave it there as a just in case? Shouldn't do anything if it's already installed, at least.

Reviewer: Yea I was installing everything from scratch in a Linux VM and rustup didn't seem to install it by default.

Reviewer 2: You're right, [it looks like it's required](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustup/concepts/components.html#components):

> `rust-src` — This is a local copy of the source code of the Rust standard library. This can be used by some tools, such as [RLS](https://github.com/rust-lang/rls), to provide auto-completion for functions within the standard library; [Miri](https://github.com/rust-lang/miri/) which is a Rust interpreter; **and Cargo's experimental [build-std](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/cargo/reference/unstable.html#build-std) feature**, which allows you to rebuild the standard library locally.

  rustup target add wasm32-unknown-emscripten --toolchain nightly
  ```

- Install Emscripten
  - The simplest way to achieve this is to install `emsdk` from the git repo. Recommended to use version 3.1.39 for now[^1]

  ```sh
  git clone https://github.com/emscripten-core/emsdk.git
  cd emsdk
  ./emsdk install 3.1.39
  ./emsdk activate 3.1.39
  source ./emsdk.sh     (or ./emsdk.bat on windows)
  ```

  - It would also be HIGHLY recommended to follow the instructions in the terminal to add `emcc`[^2] to your `PATH`.
    If not, it is necessary to manually `source` the `emsdk.sh` file in every new terminal prior to compilation.

>     This is platform-specific.

Reviewer 2: Can be inside an ` ```admonish note title="..." `.
The "HIGHLY" could then be decapitalized.

---

## Project Configuration

- Enable the `experimental-wasm` feature on `gdext` in the `Cargo.toml` file.
  It is also strongly recommended to enable the `lazy-function-tables` feature to avoid an extremely long compile time with release builds.
  It is likely to due a bug, but is still being investigated.  Edit the line to something like the following:

  ```toml
  godot = { git = "https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext", branch = "master", features = ["experimental-wasm", "lazy-function-tables"] }
  ```

- At the same level as your `Cargo.toml`, create a `.config` directory and inside of that,

>   create a `config.toml` file (if one doesn't already exist). The contents of this file should be as follows

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  create a `config.toml` file (if one doesn't already exist). The contents of this file should be as follows:
```

  ```toml
  [target.wasm32-unknown-emscripten]
  rustflags = [
      "-C", "link-args=-sSIDE_MODULE=2",
      "-C", "link-args=-sUSE_PTHREADS=1",
      "-C", "target-feature=+atomics,+bulk-memory,+mutable-globals",
      "-Zlink-native-libraries=no"
  ]
  ```

- Edit the project's `.gdextension` file to include support for web exports.

>   This file will probably be at `godot/EXTENSIONNAME.gdextension`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This file will probably be at `godot/{YourCrate}.gdextension`.
```
to be consistent with [Hello World](https://godot-rust.github.io/book/intro/hello-world.html).

>   The format will be similar to the following

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The format will be similar to the following:
```

  ```gdextension
  web.debug.wasm32 = "res://../rust/target/wasm32-unknown-emscripten/debug/EXTENSIONNAME.wasm"
  web.release.wasm32 = "res://../rust/target/wasm32-unknown-emscripten/release/EXTENSIONNAME.wasm"
  ```

---

## Compile the Project

- Verify `emcc` is in the `PATH`. This can be as simple as doing the following:

  ```sh
  emcc --version
  ```

- Compile the code.
  It is necessary to both use the nightly compiler and specify to build std[^3], along with specifying the Emscripten target.

  ```sh
  cargo +nightly build -Zbuild-std --target wasm32-unknown-emscripten
  ```

---

> ## Set up and Test in the Godot Editor

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Godot Editor setup
```
